How does the Internet work?

Users access the internet via their browser. A browser (Edge, Safari, Chrome, Firefox, etc.) is a program installed on their device that can read HTML and CSS, run JavaScript code, send web requests, receive web responses, and finally render a web page based on all those previous functionalities (and more beyond the scope of this description). HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) is a system by which information is structured using tags in a flexible, but logically functional manner allowing for designers to create a wide variety of web pages that are all readable by browsers. A CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) are a structured method for defining the presentation (size, position, color, etc.) of HTML information. JavaScript code provides dynamic functionality to a webpage by altering the HTML/CSS structures, performing mathematical, logical, and formatting operations on data, as well as sending and receiving data from other computers (servers) throughout the world. Finally, with all those pieces in place, the browser can display the page to the user.

What happens when the user clicks a link?

Clicking a link is a common method of utilizing a URL (Uniform Resource Locator) to retrieve information from the internet. Here is an example of a URL for a google maps webpage: https://www.google.com/maps/@42.2205305,-83.1756179,15z?hl=en&authuser=0. The URL can be broken down into several parts. The protocol (https://) is the standardized method of information transmission that the browser and server agree to use for this interaction. There are numerous types of protocols for different uses, but http:// and the more secure version, https:// are the most common for getting information from a webpage. The domain name (www.google.com) is the human readable address for the website. It is converted to the computer readable address, known as an IP address (Internet Protocol address, 126.86.102.47 for example) by a DNS (Domain Name Server). This conversion allows humans to type an easy to remember URL and for the computers to route the request to the right domain (location). The next portion of the URL is the path or endpoint (/maps/@42.2205305,-83.1756179,15z). This directs the users request to a specific resource within the domain (Google). Finally, with our request sent to the correct resource on a Google Server, the URL can provide query parameters (hl=en&authuser=0) that will provide additional information about the nature of our data request. Once the server process the request, it returns a reply that may contain HTML or JavaScript code that will help the browser render the final webpage for the user.